    Now that Alex has the basic lvm stuff in we need to add soft-raid-1 
    to it.  I have some ideas on how it could be implemented.

    This is not set in stone at all, this is just me rattling off my
    RAID-1 implementation ideas.  It isn't quite as complex as it sounds,
    really!  I swear it isn't!  But if we could implement something like
    this we would have the best soft-raid-1 implementation around.

    Here are the basic problems which need to be solved:

	* Allow partial downtimes for pieces of the mirror such that
	  when the mirror becomes whole again the entire drive does not
	  have to be copied.  Instead only the segments of the drive that
	  are out of sync would be resynchronized.

	  We want to avoid having to completely resynchronize the entire
	  contents of a potentially multi-terabyte drive if one is
	  taken offline temporarily and then brought back online.

	* Allow mixed I/O errors on both drives making up the mirror
	  without taking the entire mirror offline.

	* Allow I/O read or write errors on one drive to degrade only
	  the related segment and not the whole drive.

	* Allow most writes to be asynchronous to the two drives making
	  up the mirror up to the synchronization point.  Avoid unnecessary
	  writes to the segment array on-media even through a synchronization
	  point.

	* Detect out-of-sync mirrors that are out of sync due to a system
	  crash occuring prior to a synchronization point (i.e. when the
	  drives themselves are just fine).  When this case occurs either
	  copy is valid and one must be selected, but then the selected
	  copy must be resynchronized to the other drive in the mirror
	  to prevent the read data from 'changing' randomly from the point
	  of view of whoever is reading it.

    And my idea on implementation:

	* Implement a segment descriptor array for each drive in the
	  mirror, breaking the drive down into large pieces.  For
	  example, 128MB per segment.  The segment array would be stored
	  on both disks making up the mirror.  In addition, each disk will
	  store the segment state for BOTH disks.

	  Thus a 1TBx2 mirror would have 8192x4 segments (4 segment
	  descriptors for each logical segment).  The segment descriptor
	  array would idealy be small enough to cache in-memory.  Being
	  able to cache it in-memory simplifies lookups.

	  A segment descriptor would be, oh I don't know... probably
	  16 bytes.  Leave room for expansion :-)

	  Why does each disk need to store a segment descriptor for both
	  disks?  So we can 'remember' the state of the dead disk on the
	  live disk in order to resolve mismatches later on when the
	  dead disk comes back to life.

	* The state of the segment descriptor must be consulted when reading
	  or writing.  Some states are in-memory-only states while others
	  can exist on-media or in-memory.  The states are represented by
	  a set of bit flags:

	  MEDIA_UNSTABLE	0: The content is stable on-media and
				   fully synchronized.

				1: The content is unstable on-media
				   (writes have been made and have not
				    been completely synchronized to both
				    drives).

	  MEDIA_READ_DEGRADED	0: No I/O read error occured on this segment
				1: I/O read error(s) occured on this segment

	  MEDIA_WRITE_DEGRADED	0: No I/O write error occured on this segment
				1: I/O write error(s) occured on this segment

	  MEDIA_MASTER		0: Normal operation

				1: Mastership operation for this segment
				   on this drive, which is set when the
				   other drive in the mirror has failed
				   and writes are made to the drive that
				   is still operational.

	  UNINITIALIZED		0: The segment contains normal data.

				1: The entire segment is empty and should
				   read all zeros regardless of the actual
				   content on the media.

				   (Use for newly initialized mirrors as
				   a way to avoid formatting the whole
				   drive or SSD?).

	  OLD_UNSTABLE		Copy of original MEDIA_UNSTABLE bit initially
				read from the media.  This bit is only
				recopied after the related segment has been
				fully synchronized.

	  OLD_MASTER		Copy of original MEDIA_MASTER bit initially
				read from the media.  This bit is only
				recopied after the related segment has been
				fully synchronized.

	  We probably need room for a serial number or timestamp in the
	  segment descriptor as well in order to resolve certain situations.

	* Since updating a segment descriptor on-media is expensive
	  (requiring at least one disk synchronization command and of
	  course a nasty seek), segment descriptors on-media are updated
	  synchronously only when going from a STABLE to an UNSTABLE state,
	  meaning the segment is undergoing active writing.

	  Changing a segment descriptor from unstable to stable can be
	  delayed indefinitely (synchronized on a long timer, like
	  30 or 60 seconds).  All that happens if a crash occurs in the
	  mean time is a little extra copying of segments occurs on
	  reboot.  Theoretically anyway.

    Ok, now what actions need to be taken to satisfy a read or write?
    The actions taken will be based on the segment state for the segment
    involved in the I/O.  Any I/O which crosses a segment boundary would
    be split into two or more I/Os and treated separately.

    Remember there are four descriptors for each segment, two on each drive:

	DISK1 STATE stored on disk1
	DISK2 STATE stored on disk1

	DISK1 STATE stored on disk2
	DISK2 STATE stored on disk2

    In order to simplify matters any inconstencies between e.g. the DISK2
    state as stored on disk1 and the DISK2 state as stored on disk2 would
    be resolved immediately prior to initiation of the actual I/O.  Otherwise
    the combination of four states is just too complex.

    So if both drives are operational this resolution must take place.  If
    only one drive is operational then the state stored in the segment
    descriptors on that one operational drive is consulted to obtain the
    state of both drives.

    This is the hard part.  Lets take the mismatched cases first.  That is,
    when the DISK2 STATE stored on DISK1 is different from the DISK2 STATE
    stored on DISK2 (or vise-versa... disk1 state stored on each drive):

	* If one of the two conflicting states has the UNSTABLE or MASTER
	  bits set then set the same bits in the other.

	  Basically just OR some of the bits together and store to
	  both copies.  But not all of the bits.

	* If doing a write operation and the segment is marked UNITIALIZED
	  the entire segment must be zero-filled and the bit cleared prior
	  to the write operation. ????  (needs more thought, maybe even a
	  sub-bitmap. See later on in this email).

    Ok, now we have done that we can just consider two states, one for
    DISK1 and one for DISK2, coupled with the I/O operation:

    WHEN READING:

	* If MASTER is NOT set on either drive the read may be
	  sent to either drive.

	* If MASTER is set on one of the drives the read must be sent
	  only to that drive.

	* If MASTER is set on both drives then we are screwed.  This case
	  can occur if one of the mirror drives goes down and a bunch of
	  writes are made to the other, then system is rebooted and the
	  original mirror drive comes up but the other drive goes down.

	  So this condition detects a conflict.  We must return an I/O
	  error for the READ, presumably.  The only way to resolve this
	  is for a manual intervention to explicitly select one or the
	  other drive as the master.

	* If READ_DEGRADED is set on one drive the read can be directed to
	  the other.  If READ_DEGRADED is set on both drives then either
	  drive can be selected.  If the read fails on any given drive
	  it is of course redispatched to the other drive regardless.

	  When READ_DEGRADED is set on one drive and only one drive is up
	  we still issue the read to that drive, obviously, since we have
	  no other choice.

    WHEN WRITING:

	* If MASTER is NOT set on either drive the write is directed to
	  both drives.

	* Otherwise a WRITE is directed only to the drive with MASTER set.

	* If both drives are marked MASTER the write is directed to both
	  drives.  This is a conflict situation on read but writing will
	  still work just fine.  The MASTER bit is left alone.

	* If an I/O error occurs on one of the drives the WRITE_DEGRADED
	  bit is set for that drive and the other drive (where the write
	  succeeded) is marked as MASTER.

	  However, we can only do this if neither drive is already a MASTER. 

	  If a drive is already marked MASTER we cannot mark the other drive
	  as MASTER.  The failed write will cause an I/O error to be
	  returned.

    RESYNCHRONIZATION:

	* A kernel thread is created manage mirror synchronization.

	* Synchronization of out-of-sync mirror segments can occur
	  asynchnronously, but must interlock against I/O operations
	  that might conflict.

	  The segment array on the drive(s) is used to determine what
	  segments need to be resynchronized.

	* Synchronization occurs when the segment for one drive is
	  marked MASTER and the segment for the other drive is not.

	* In a conflict situation (where both drives are marked MASTER
	  for any given segment) a manual intervention is required to
	  specify (e.g. through an ioctl) which of the two drives is
	  the master.  This overrides the MASTER bits for all segments
	  and allows synchronization to occur for all conflicting
	  segments (or possibly all segments, period, in the case where
	  a new mirror drive is being deployed).

    Segment array on-media and header.

	* The mirroring code must reserve some of the sectors on the
	  drives to hold a header and the segment array, making the
	  resulting logical mirror a bit smaller than it otherwise would
	  be.

	* The header must contain a unique serial number (the uuid code
	  can be used to generate it).

	* When manual intervention is required to specify a master a new
	  unique serial number must be generated for that master to
	  prevent 'old' mirror drives that were removed from the system
	  from being improperly recognized as being part of the new mirror
	  when they aren't any more.

	* Automatic detection of the mirror status is possible by using
	  the serial number in the header.

	* If the serial numbers for the header(s) for the two drives
	  making up the mirror do not match (when both drives are up and 
	  both header read I/Os succeeded), manual intervention is required.

	* Auto-detection of mirror segments ala Geom... using on-disk headers,
	  is discouraged.  I think it is too dangerous and would much rather
	  the detection be based on drive serial number rather than serial
	  numbers stored on-media in headers.

	  However, I guess this is a function of LVM?  So I might not have
	  any control over it.

    The UNINITIALIZED FLAG

	When formatting a new mirror or when a drive is torn out and a new
	drive is added the drive(s) in question must be formatted.  To
	avoid actually writing to all sectors of the drive, which would
	take too long on multi-terabyte drives and create unnecesary
	writes on things like SSDs we instead of an UNINITIALIZED flag
	state in the descriptor.

	If set any read I/O to the related segment is simply zero-filled.

	When writing we have to zero-fill the segment (write zeros to the
	whole 128MB segment) and then clear the UNINITIALIZED flag before
	allowing the write I/O to proceed.

	We might want to use some of the bits in the descriptor as a 
	sub-bitmap.  e.g. if we reserve 4 bytes in the 16-byte descriptor
	to be an 'UNINITIALIZED' sub-bitmap we can break the 128MB
	segment down into 4MB pieces and only zero-fill/write portions
	of the 128MB segment instead of having to do the whole segment.

	I don't know how well this idea would work in real life.  Another
	option is to just return random data for the uninitialized portions
	of a new mirror but that kinda breaks the whole abstraction and
	could blow up certain types of filesystems, like ZFS, which
	assume any read data is stable on-media.


						-Matt


